hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eatonson
welcome to heal NPD the topic of
narcissistic abuse tends to be highly
charged and people tend to have
extremely strong feelings about it but I
also think that's why it deserves some
time and attention as a term
narcissistic abuse is not well defined
it's easily co-opted to fuel heavily
stigmatized representations of
pathological narcissism and NPD it's
used to describe anything from mild
bullying and criticism to domestic abuse
stalking and all points in between and
it's precisely because no one has a
solid definition of this term that it's
so dangerous
[Music]
foreign
first it's important to know that this
is not a term with an established
definition in the clinical literature
for the time being narcissistic abuse is
mostly a lay term and it varies in
meaning depending on the user and the
Forum in which it's discussed but most
forums that I found discussing this term
conceptualize it to be a form of abuse
that involves several essential features
these include love bombing gaslighting
ignoring boundaries criticizing or
devaluing and other forms of
interpersonal manipulation or bullying
so going through this list I don't see
anything specific to pathological
narcissism or NPD love bombing or
idealizing others for instance is a
feature of several personality disorders
not just NPD idealizing devaluing and
splitting are all Hallmarks of something
called borderline personality
organization which is different than
borderline personality disorder
borderline personality organization is a
range of psychological functioning that
involves moderate to severe psychopath
apology all personality disorders reside
within this range of functioning and
therefore many of them deploy similar
defense mechanisms
goes for rewriting interpersonal history
and events or otherwise minimizing the
consequences of one's own actions this
is known by the popular term gaslighting
individuals with BPD HPD NPD and
anti-social personality disorder will
often minimize the negative effects of
their actions on others or claim that
the person is simply misremembering what
actually happened like idealizing
devaluing and splitting this rewriting
of history is another Hallmark of
borderline personality organization what
about ignoring boundaries again this is
something that's common to most
personality disorders individuals with
personality disorders tend to have
difficulty respecting the boundaries of
other people due to impulsivity and also
due to deficits in their ability to
understand that other people have
internal experiences that are different
from their own internal experiences it's
common for individuals with BPD HPD NPD
and anti-social personality disorder to
project their own thoughts and feelings
onto other people and then to hold them
accountable for quote making the person
feel a certain way one of the main goals
of most therapies that address
personality disorders is to help the
person understand that just because they
feel a certain way doesn't mean that
other people meant to make them feel
that way
reinforcing boundaries is a major
component of the work in the treatment
of almost every Personality Disorder so
we can't properly say that it's Unique
to narcissism what about manipulation
again it's common for people with
personality disorders to struggle with
interpersonal Effectiveness and
communication emotional coercion
interpersonal manipulation and
pressuring other people to do or say
what the person wants Etc are all
Hallmarks of numerous personality
disorders and this is partly due to
impairments in recognizing boundaries
which we just discussed and partly due
to the pressure of the individual's
emotional needs and insecurities they
just have a difficult time respecting
the feelings and wishes of other people
you know going down the list most
frequently cited features of
narcissistic abuse actually involve
mechanisms and interpersonal behaviors
that are commonly seen in personality
disorders and other forms of moderate to
severe mental illness that includes some
mood and anxiety disorders bipolar
disorder and also substance abuse
disorders so what about narcissistic
abuse is actually unique to narcissism
why not simply call it abuse and be done
with it why unnecessarily stigmatize
this population that's already at risk
for things like suicide depression and
self-harm
well thinking about it there is one form
of abuse that I think actually is unique
to pathological narcissism and NPD and
like many other kinds of abuse this one
is transmitted from generation to
generation and it's actually the reason
why most individuals struggle with NPD
in the first place this form of abuse
involves using other people to meet
one's own self-esteem needs it's
essentially what parents and caregivers
do to children who grow up to struggle
with pathological narcissism it's a form
of emotional neglect paired with a form
of interpersonal manipulation that
pressures the child into ignoring their
own feelings in favor of quote living up
to the expectations of the caregiver
in a previous video entitled why
narcissists feel empty inside I outlined
this kind of abuse and the ways in which
it results in an impaired relationship
with genuine thoughts and feelings
narcissists are set up to become
flattering mirrors for their caregivers
when they grow into adulthood this
disconnect from authenticity leaves the
narcissistic individual always hungry
for approval and because they can't see
themselves as a self as an individual
Center of internal experience that's
valid and important in its own right
they can't see other people as selves
either
everyone becomes an object everyone is
rated in terms of how well they're
performing according to whatever
standards of performance or set up when
the narcissist was young NPD is a
disorder that robs everyone of their
Humanity The Narcissist was robbed of
their Humanity when they were young and
they grow into an adult who's feverishly
trying to fill a void where a connection
to authenticity should be instead
there's something called a false self
which is an objectified experience of
selfhood on which the narcissist has
come to rely it's the inauthentic quote
self that the individual developed as a
child to meet the narcissistic needs of
their caregiver
the false self runs on approval it
collapses in the absence of continuous
infusions of admiration approval success
and affiliation with idealized others
The Narcissist must continually
reinforce the false self by pressuring
other people to approve of them or to
admire them this becomes another Link in
the chain of using others and exploiting
them to meet one's own self-esteem and
emotional needs the narcissist does to
other people what was done to them
this chain of dehumanization continues
unabated until someone finally enters
treatment and sets their mind to putting
a stop to it but doing that requires
knowing about it in the first place and
because the false self can be so
convincingly real to The Narcissist they
have no idea that they're stuck in a
never-ending quest for temporary
self-esteem
this way of using someone of negating or
ignoring their selfhood of seeing and
treating them as an object in order to
maintain the viability of a false self
I think could properly be said to be
unique to NPD and therefore to
constitute an actual definition of
narcissistic abuse but this is far from
the villainous or predatory image
conjured in most forums discussing this
topic for one it doesn't necessarily
involve conscious manipulation
rather it's simply a way of being and
relating that was learned in childhood
and that's perpetuated by Deep deficits
and impairments in the narcissist's self
unlike other definitions of narcissistic
abuse this one holds the humanity of all
involved by recognizing the hurt and
pain both for the narcissist and for the
people that they abuse in this way the
way out of this cycle of abuse is to
look inside it's to embrace
vulnerability emptiness loss and want
it's to work on admitting to yourself
that the visions of perfection and the
feelings of grandiosity are fantasies
and they can't ever be real
the false self is a Monument built to
Shield the individual from pain of abuse
that has already occurred and it must be
torn down this demolition work is best
accomplished within the safety of a
therapy relationship with a licensed
mental health provider
if you identify as someone with
pathological narcissism or NPD ending
the chain of abuse is up to you and it
starts by learning to recognize your own
Humanity only then will you be able to
see the humanity in others
work on finding a place inside of
yourself that's stable balanced and
authentic this is the foundation from
which you can begin to construct an
authentic experience of selfhood and an
image of self that's not reliant on the
approval of other people
as you grow into your sense of yourself
as an authentic vulnerable human being
you'll begin to get better at managing
the storms of emotion that often result
in mistreatment of yourself and of
others and as your image of yourself
becomes more stable and more grounded in
authentic feeling rather than
objectified standards like performance
your image of others will also become
more stable
they'll be less splitting less
idealizing and devaluing less
gaslighting and less boundary Crossing
okay so that's it for today as always
leave comments questions and ideas for
future episodes and please also give
this video a like or subscribe if you
found it helpful and until next time
take good care
[Music]